CAN LANGUAGE MODELS SYSTEMATICALLY GENERALIZE?
A model exhibits systematic generalization if it can apply learned rules compositionally beyond the
specific configurations observed during training. This includes both solving problems built from
disjoint primitives and solving problems that require deeper recursive application of the same rule.
In our setting, this corresponds to generating valid shortest paths in previously unseen maps (spatial
transfer) and generating valid shortest paths of greater lengths than those seen during training (length
scaling). We begin by presenting the high-level generalization behavior under the strongest training
configuration (Figure 1), and defer a detailed breakdown of training data and paradigm choices to
later sections. Specifically, the model is evaluated on maps not used during shortest-path training
to assess spatial transfer (blue bars). For length scaling, we evaluate both the training map (red
bars) and unseen maps (orange bars) on start–end pairs whose shortest paths are longer than those
observed during training. We observe that language models achieve consistently high success rates
(above 90%) on spatial transfer (blue bars), but performance degrades sharply under length scaling,
regardless of whether spatial transfer is present (orange bars) or not (red bars).
This length scaling failure is surprising. Intuitively, if a model can reliably solve smaller problems
(i.e., shorter paths), one might expect it to decompose a larger problem into small segments to solve.
We thus consider two possible explanations:
• Hardness accumulation. As shorter paths are not perfectly solved (i.e., ID length success rate ̸=
100%), longer paths may fail simply because they are more likely to contain difficult subproblems.
• Recursive instability. Even when shorter segments are individually solvable, the model may fail
to stably compose them under longer recursive generation.
To disentangle these effects, we decompose long-path success rates, Pr(Long). For each test path of
length exceeding training length, we split it into two subpaths, Sub1 and Sub2, each within training
length. Then, by the law of total probability,
Pr(Long) = Pr(Long |Sub1 ∧Sub2) Pr(Sub1 ∧Sub2) + Pr(Long,,¬(Sub1 ∧Sub2)).
Here, Pr(Sub1 ∧Sub2) is the probability that both subpaths are solved correctly, while Pr(Long |
Sub1 ∧Sub2) measures the probability of correctly generating the full path when both subpaths
are individually solvable. Results in Table 1 show that the complementary term Pr(Long, ¬(Sub1 ∧
Sub2)) is small and relatively stable across length groups, compared to the dominant term Pr(Long |
Sub1 ∧Sub2) Pr(Sub1 ∧Sub2). Focusing on the dominant term, we observe that Pr(Sub1 ∧Sub2) ≈
Pr(Sub)2. That is, hardness accumulation arises primarily as a multiplicative probability effect
from imperfect subpath performance. Given the high subpath performance, the resulting decrease
in Pr(Sub1 ∧Sub2) is modest as length increases (0.846 → 0.796). In contrast, the drop in
Pr(Long | Sub1 ∧Sub2) is substantially larger (0.811 → 0.589), showing that length scaling
failure is dominated by compositional instability.
Takeaway 1: Language models exhibit systematic spatial generalization on composable SOPs,
but this success does not extend to length scaling: even if a model can solve smaller instances, it
struggles to stably compose them to solve larger ones.
4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
In the following sections, we analyze how trainin